RAG Learning Notes

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a technique that combines information retrieval with a language model. Instead of relying only on the knowledge stored inside the model, a RAG system retrieves relevant information from external documents and provides that information to the language model as context.

A basic RAG pipeline usually contains these steps:

1. Load documents.
2. Split documents into smaller chunks.
3. Convert chunks into embeddings.
4. Store embeddings in a vector database.
5. Retrieve the most relevant chunks for a user query.
6. Pass the retrieved context to the language model.
7. Generate an answer using the retrieved information.

LangChain provides document loaders that make it easier to load different types of data. TextLoader is used to load plain text files.

Example:

from langchain_community.document_loaders import TextLoader

loader = TextLoader("rag_notes.txt")
documents = loader.load()

The load() method returns a list of Document objects. Each Document generally contains the document text in page_content and additional information in metadata.

For example, a text file containing information about Java, Spring Boot, and artificial intelligence can be loaded with TextLoader and then passed to a text splitter.

Text splitting is useful because large documents are usually divided into smaller chunks before creating embeddings. Smaller chunks make retrieval more focused and efficient.

Example RAG technologies include LangChain, Hugging Face, OpenAI models, FAISS, Chroma, Pinecone, and other vector databases.

Important terms:

Document: The original source of information.
Chunk: A smaller section created from a document.
Embedding: A numerical representation of text that captures semantic meaning.
Vector Database: A database designed to store and search embeddings.
Retriever: A component that finds relevant chunks for a query.
LLM: A large language model that generates the final response.
Context: Retrieved information supplied to the language model.

A simple RAG question could be:

Question: What is TextLoader used for?

Answer: TextLoader is used in LangChain to load text files and convert their contents into Document objects that can be processed by the RAG pipeline.
